# Security Process Data Collection

## Asset privacy

Involves ensuring that all organizational assets have the level of privacy that is needed

## Data Processors
* any personnel within an organization who process the data that has been collected throughout the entire life cycle of the data
* individual accesses the data in any way, that individual can be cosidered a data processor
* in some organizations data processorts are only those individuals who can enter or change data
* security awareness = importance of asset privacy, especially data privacy

## Collection limitation
* data collection limitation exists based on the available storage space
* Systems owners and data custodians should monitor the amount of free storage space so that they understand trends and can anticipate further needs before space becomes critical
  * no monitoring = data can grow to the point where system performance is affected
* disk quotas
  * allow to set disk space limitations, automatic monitoring and alerts
  
## Data Access and Sharing
* Personnel must be able to access and share data in they day-to-day duties
* need to consider:
    * Are the approapriate data policies in place to control the access and use of data?
    * Do the data owners understand the access needs of the users?
    * What are the different levels of access needed by the users?
    * Which data formats do the users need?
    * Are there subsets of data that should have only restricted access for users?
    * Of the data being collected, is there clearly identified private versus public data?
    * Is data being protected both when it is at rest and when it is in transit?
    * Are there any legal or jurisdictional issues related to data storage location, data transmission, or data processing?
    
