# Cryptography Techniques

Technology does provide valid and interesting alternatives to cryptography when a message needs to be protected during transmission. Some useful options are listed in the following sections.

## Steganography
* art of hiding the existence of a message
* related (as purpose is to protect the contents of a message) but different from cryptography (since contents of the message aren't encrypted)
* existence of the message is hidden in some other communications medium

*For example, a message may be hidden in a graphic or sound file, slack space on storage media, traffic noise over a network, or in a digital image. By using the example of a digital image, the least significant bit of each byte in the image could be used to transmit a hidden message without noticeably altering the image. However, because the message itself isn’t encrypted, if it is discovered, its contents can be easily compromised.*

## Digital watermarking
* technique similiar to steganography, that can be used to verify authenticity of an image/data
* or to protect the intellectual property rights of the creator
* visible cousing of steganography

# Symmetric and Asymmetric Key Systems

Cryptographic algorithms are broadly classified as either symmetric or asymmetric key systems.

## Symmetric key cryptography

Also known as symmetric algorithm, secret key, single key, and private key, uses a single key to both encrypt and decrypt information.

Two parties (Thomas and Richard) can exchange an encrypted message with Symmetric Key Cryptography by using the following procedure:
* The sender (Thomas) encrypts the plaintext message with a secret key known only to the intended recipient (Richard).
* The sender then transmits the encrypted message to the intended recipient
* The recipient decrypts the message with the same secret key to obtain the plaintext message

In order for an attacker (Harold) to read the message, he must guess the secret key (for example, a brute force attack) or intercept the secret key during the initial exchange.

Advantages
* Speed: Symmetric systems are much faster than asymmetric systems
* Strength: Strength is gained when used with a large key
* Availability: Many algorithms are available

Disadvantages
* Distribution: Secure distribution of secret keys is absolutely required either through out-of-band methods or by using asymmetric systems.
* Scalability: A different key is required for each pair of communicating parties.
* Limited functionality: Symmetric systems can’t provide authentication or non-repudiation.

Symmetric key algorithms include DES, Triple DES, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA), and RC5. Symmetric key systems use a shared secret key.

### Data Encryption Standard (DES)
* DES is a block cipher that uses a 56-bit key
* DES algorithm is a symmetric (or private) key cipher consisting of an algorithm and a key
* The algorithm is a 64-bit block cipher based on a 56-bit symmetric key

### Electronic Code Book (ECB)
* native mode for DES operation and normally produces the highest throughput
* best used for encrypting keys or small amounts of data
* operates on 64-bit blocks of plaintext independently and produces 64-bit blocks of ciphertext
* significant disadvantage of ECB is that the same plaintext, encrypted with the same key, will always produce the same ciphertext

### Cipher Block Chaining (CBC)
* the most common mode of DES operation
* 64-bit blocks of plaintext produce 64-bit blocks of ciphertext
  * but each block is XORed with the ciphertext of the preceding block to create a dependency or chain, thereby producing a more random ciphertext result
* The first block is encrypted with a random block known as the initialization vector (IV)


### The Exclusive Or (XOR) function
* a binary operation applied to two input bits: for example, a plaintext bit and a key bit
* if the two bits are equal, the result is 0 (zero)
* if the two bits aren’t equal, the result is 1

### Cipher Feedback (CFB)
* is a stream cipher most often used to encrypt individual characters
* previously generated ciphertext is used as feedback for key generation in the next key stream
* the resulting cipher-text is chained together, which causes errors to be multiplied throughout the encryption process

### Output Feedback (OFB)
* similiar to CFB
* often used to encrypt satellite communications
* previous plain-text is used as feedback for key generation in the next key stream
* resulting ciphertext is not chained together; therefore, errors don’t spread throughout the encryption process

*The four modes of DES are ECB, CBC, CFB, and OFB. ECB and CBC are the most commonly used.*

*The original goal of the DES standard was to develop an encryption standard that would be viable for 10–15 years. Although DES far exceeded this goal, in 1999 the Electronic Frontier Foundation achieved the inevitable, breaking a DES key in only 23 hours.*

### Triple DES (3DES)

Triple DES (3DES) has effectively extended the life of the DES algorithm. In Triple DES implementations, a message is encrypted by using one key, encrypted by using a second key, and then again encrypted by using either the first key or a third key.

The several variations of Triple DES (3DES) are as follows:
* DES-EEE2 (Encrypt-Encrypt-Encrypt) using 1st key, 2nd key, 1st key
* DES-EDE2 (Encrypt-Decrypt-Encrypt) using 1st key, 2nd key, 1st key
* DES-EEE3 (Encrypt-Encrypt-Encrypt) using 1st key, 2nd key, 3rd key
* DES-EDE3 (Encrypt-Decrypt-Encrypt) using 1st key, 2nd key, 3rd key

*The basic function of Triple DES is sometimes explained like this: The message is encrypted using one key, decrypted using a second key, and again encrypted using the first key. The differences in syntax (and operation) are subtle but important: The second key (in an EDE implementation) doesn’t truly decrypt the original message because the output is still gibberish (ciphertext). This variation was developed for backwards compatibility with single DES cryptosystems. Also, you should understand that use of the first key twice (in EDE2 and EEE2) is one common implementation, but use of a third distinct key is also possible (in EDE3 and EEE3).*

* performance cost is significant
* won't work with many apps requiring high-speed thourghput of large volume of data
* weakness exists, allows to reduce the effective key size to 108 bits in a brute force attack


### Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)

The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is a block cipher that will eventually replace DES. In October 2000, NIST announced selection of the Rijndael Block Cipher to implement AES. AES is based on the Rijndael Block Cipher.

### Rijndael Block Cipher

The Rijndael Block Cipher, developed by Dr. Joan Daemen and Dr. Vincent Rijmen, has variable block and key lengths (128, 192, or 256 bits). It was designed to be simple, resistant to known attacks, and fast.

### Twofish Algorithm

The Twofish Algorithm was a finalist in the AES selection process. It is a symmetric block cipher that operates on 128-bit (instead of 64-bit) blocks, employing 16 rounds with key lengths up to 256 bits.

### IDEA Cipher

*The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) cipher evolved from the Proposed Encryption Standard and the Improved Proposed Encryption Standard (IPES) originally developed in 1990. IDEA is a block cipher that operates on 64-bit plaintext blocks using a 128-bit key. IDEA performs eight rounds on 16-bit sub-blocks and can operate in four distinct modes similar to DES. The IDEA cipher provides stronger encryption than RC4 and Triple DES, but because it’s patented, it’s not widely used. It is, however, used in the Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) e-mail encryption system.”*

### RC5

RC5 (Rivest Cipher No. 5 [ as distinguished from Mambo No. 5]) is part of a series of symmetric algorithms developed by RSA Data Security. RC2 is a block mode cipher that encrypts 64-bit blocks of data by using a variable-length key. RC4 is a stream cipher (data is encrypted in real time) that uses a variable-length key (128 bits is standard). RC5 is similar to RC2 but includes a variable-length key (0 to 2048 bits), variable block size (32, 64, or 128 bits) and variable number of processing rounds (0 to 255).

## Asymmetric key cryptography

Also known as asymmetric algorithm or public key. Uses 2 seperate keys: one to encrypt and second to decrypt. These are known as public and private key pairs. 

Exchanging an Encrypted Message with Asymmetric Key Cryptography:
* The sender (Thomas) encrypts the plaintext message with the intended recipient’s (Richard) public key.
* This produces a ciphertext message that can then be transmitted to the intended recipient (Richard).
* The recipient (Richard) then decrypts the message with his private key, known only to him.

Only the private key can decrypt the message; thus, an attacker (Harold) possessing only the public key can’t decrypt the message. This also means that not even the original sender can decrypt the message. This use of an asymmetric key system is known as a secure message. A secure message guarantees the confidentiality of the message.

If the sender wants to guarantee the authenticity of a message (or, more correctly, the authenticity of the sender), he can sign the message by using the procedure of signing a message to guarantee authenticity:
* The sender (Thomas) encrypts the plaintext message with his own private key.
* This produces a ciphertext message that can then be transmitted to the intended recipient (Richard).
* To verify that the message is in fact from the purported sender, the recipient (Richard) applies the sender’s (Thomas’s) public key (which is known to every Tom, Dick, and Harry).

Of course, an attacker can also verify the authenticity of the message. This use of an asymmetric key system is known as an open message format because only the authenticity, not the confidentiality, is guaranteed. Open message format uses the sender’s private key to protect authenticity.

If the sender wants to guarantee both the confidentiality and authenticity of a message, he can do so by using the following procedure of guaranteeing confidentiality and authenticity of a message:

* The sender (Thomas) encrypts the message first with the intended recipient’s (Richard’s) public key and then with his own private key.
* This produces a ciphertext message that can then be transmitted to the intended recipient (Richard).
* The recipient (Richard) uses the sender’s (Thomas’s) public key to verify the authenticity of the message, and then uses his own private key to decrypt the message’s contents.

If an attacker intercepts the message, he can apply the sender’s public key but will then have an encrypted message that can’t be decrypted without the intended recipient’s private key. Thus, both confidentiality and authenticity are assured. This use of an asymmetric key system is known as a secure and signed message format.

Advantages:
* Extended functionality 
  * Asymmetric key systems can provide both confidentiality and authentication; symmetric systems can only provide confidentiality
* Scalability
  * This resolves key management issues associated with symmetric key systems

Disadvantages
* speed: because of one-way hash functions, very large keys are required

Asymmetric key algorithms include RSA, Diffie-Hellman, El Gamal, Merkle-Hellman (Trapdoor) Knapsack, and Elliptic Curve.

### RSA

In 1978, Drs. Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman published the RSA algorithm, which is a key transport algorithm based on the difficulty of factoring a number that is the product of two large prime numbers (typically 512 bits). Two users (Thomas and Richard) can securely transport symmetric keys by using RSA as follows in securely transporting symmetric keys with RSA:

* Thomas creates a symmetric key, encrypts it with Richard’s public key, and then transmits it to Richard.
* Richard decrypts the symmetric key by using his own private key.

RSA is an asymmetric key algorithm based on factoring prime numbers.


### Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange

In 1976, Drs. Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published a paper entitled “New Directions in Cryptography” detailing a new paradigm for secure key exchange based on discrete logarithms. Diffie-Hellman is described as a key agreement algorithm. Two users (Thomas and Richard) can exchange symmetric keys by using Diffie-Hellman as follows in Exchanging Symmetric Keys with Diffie-Hellman:

* Thomas and Richard obtain each other’s public keys.
* Thomas and Richard then combine their own private key with the public key of the other person, producing a symmetric key that’s known only to the two users involved in the exchange.

Diffie-Hellman key exchange is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks in which an attacker (Harold) intercepts the public keys during the initial exchange and substitutes his own private key to create a session key that will decrypt the session. A separate authentication mechanism is necessary to protect against this type of attack, ensuring that the two parties communicating in the session are, in fact, the legitimate parties.

Diffie-Hellman is an asymmetric key algorithm based on discrete logarithms.

### El Gamal

El Gamal is an unpatented, asymmetric key algorithm based on the discrete logarithm problem used in Diffie-Hellman. It extends the functionality of Diffie-Hellman to include encryption and digital signatures.

### Merkle-Hellman (Trapdoor) Knapsack

The Merkle-Hellman (Trapdoor) Knapsack, published in 1978, employs a unique approach to asymmetric cryptography. It’s based on the problem of determining what items, in a set of items with fixed weights, can be added to in order to obtain a given total weight. Knapsack was broken in 1982.

Knapsack is an asymmetric key algorithm based on fixed weights.

### Elliptic Curve (EC)

In 1985, Neal Koblitz and Victor Miller proposed a new model for asymmetric algorithms based on elliptic curves (EC). Elliptic curves are far more difficult to compute than conventional discrete logarithm problems or factoring prime numbers. (A 160-bit EC key is equivalent to a 1,024-bit RSA key.) The use of smaller keys means that EC is significantly faster than other asymmetric algorithms and many symmetric algorithms and can be widely implemented in various hardware applications including wireless devices and smart cards.

Elliptic Curve is more efficient than other asymmetric key systems and many symmetric key systems because it can use a smaller key.

